one of the things that a lot of people
comment on is that dogs seem to be
naturally attuned to them and be able to
sense their moods and whatever part of
our work here is actually to look into
the scientific basis of that the key to
a dog's ability to read our emotions
might lie in something we all do without
knowing it when we express our emotions
in our faces we don't do it
symmetrically it's been shown that if
you take somebody's face when they're
expressing some emotion like happiness
or anger or something like that there is
a difference between the left and right
side composite faces consisting of two
right or two left sides look very
different one of the theories is that
maybe our emotions are more faithfully
presented in the right side of our face
and that's the side that we tuned into
and when we look at her face we have
what's known as a natural left gaze bias
so you naturally look much more towards
the left ie the right-hand side of
somebody's face eye tracking software
has demonstrated that when presented
with a human face we nearly always look
left first Daniel Mills wanted to find
out if dogs used the same trick to read
human faces shifting the direction of
your gaze we thought was fairly unique
to people until we started looking at
dogs guys does it to test the theory his
team recreated this experiment with dogs
they presented a series of images
showing human faces dog faces and
inanimate objects and recorded the
direction of a dog's gaze with a video
camera we found that those when they are
looking at pictures of dog faces or
objects they will look randomly on the
left or the right but when it came to
human faces they made a remarkable
discovery so now we have ties looking at
a human face so first she's looking in
the middle of the screen and here is the
first eye movements on the left she's in
the middle and she's going on the left
and then the dog is gonna be even more
on the left so now this is moose and
then we can see really well that this is
a left case from here to here we can see
the white here
she's even moving her head as far as we
know no other animal has this
relationship with the human face
dogs don't do this with each other
incredibly it seems they've acquired a
new skill to enable them to read our
emotions being able to detect when
somebody is angry or potentially going
to be harmful to them you could
understand there may be a biological
advantage in being able to read people's
emotions and equally it makes sense for
a dog to approach somebody when they're
smiling if dogs can read human emotion
and increasingly the scientific evidence
is beginning to point in that direction
that's going to form the basis of a very
powerful bond between human and dog
evidence like this appears to underpin
our conviction the dogs understand us in
a way that other animals cannot